# `Check Changelog Bot` – Changelog Management Tools

This repository provides a set of tools designed to streamline the maintenance
of our changelogs. Our automated changelog generation process consists of two
key phases:

1. **Data collection**: Ensuring all necessary data for the changelog is gathered during development.
2. **Changelog creation**: Building the changelog from the collected data.

Since the changelog is generated based on the commit history, it's crucial that
commit messages follow a specific format—namely, the [Conventional Commits][ConCom]
specification—and are meaningful within the context of a changelog.

Once the commit messages adhere to our guidelines, we can generate the changelog.
This is done using [`git-cliff-enhancer`](./git-cliff-enhancer/), which is a
customized version of [`git-cliff`](https://git-cliff.org/).

## Reviewing Changelog Entries

To ensure the changelog is properly formatted, commit messages must conform to
the [Conventional Commits][ConCom] specification. This is enforced via a linting
step in our CI/CD pipeline.

The following GitLab CI/CD job verifies the commits in a merge request, failing
if any commits don't follow the conventional commit format:

```yaml
lint:commit:
  cache: {}
  image: node:lts-alpine
  stage: lint
  <<: *default_job_condition
  variables:
    GIT_DEPTH: 250
  before_script:
    - apk add --no-cache git
    - npm install -g @commitlint/cli @commitlint/config-conventional
  script:
    - npx commitlint --from $CI_MERGE_REQUEST_DIFF_BASE_SHA --to HEAD --verbose
```

Note that [`GIT_DEPTH`](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/runners/configure_runners.html#shallow-cloning)
is set to 250 but can be adjusted for each project. If a merge request contains
more commits than `GIT_DEPTH`, the job will fail because the full commit history
won’t be available in the cloned repository used by the job.

Additionally, reviewers should be mindful of commit messages during the merge
request review process. This ensures that changelog entries are reviewed at the
time of the merge request, rather than at release time.

A changelog bot will automatically open a thread in each merge request, displaying
the changelog entries generated by that merge request. The thread must be resolved
before the merge request can be merged.

You can trigger the bot with the following CI job:

```yaml
trigger_changelog_preview:
  stage: trigger
  needs: []
  rules:
    - if: $CI_PIPELINE_SOURCE == 'merge_request_event'
  variables:
    PIPELINE_PROJECT_PATH: $CI_PROJECT_PATH
    PIPELINE_MERGE_REQUEST_PROJECT_PATH: $CI_MERGE_REQUEST_SOURCE_PROJECT_PATH
    PIPELINE_MERGE_REQUEST_SOURCE_BRANCH_NAME: $CI_MERGE_REQUEST_SOURCE_BRANCH_NAME
    PIPELINE_MERGE_REQUEST_IID: $CI_MERGE_REQUEST_IID
  trigger: opentalk/tools/check-changelog
```

## Generating the Changelog

There are two key roles in changelog creation:

1. **Reviewers**, who are responsible for creating the raw material (i.e., commit
    messages) for each changelog.
2. **Changelog builders**, who generate the final changelog based on these messages.

In addition to following the [Conventional Commits][ConCom] specification, there
are several additional rules and keywords to further optimize the changelog:

### Commit Keywords

- **Link to closed issues**: In the footer of the commit, include `Closes #XYZ`
  to automatically reference the issue closed by the commit.
- **Exclude from changelog**: To exclude a commit from the changelog, add
  `Changelog: ignore` to the footer or body of the commit message.
- **Release scope**: Commits with the `release` scope are automatically excluded
  from the changelog.

### Building the Changelog

The changelog can be updated by running the [`update-changelog.sh`](./update-changelog.sh)
script. This script generates the new changelog and prepends it to the existing
changelog. Note that the script does not check for duplicate version sections or
validate previous versions.

Run the script using the following commands:

```bash
export GITLAB_REPO="<GitLab-Project-Path>"
export GITLAB_API_URL=https://git.opentalk.dev/api/v4
export GITLAB_TOKEN=$(cat ~/.gitlab_token)
bash update-changelog.sh "<version>"
```

Make sure to install `git-cliff-enhancer` before running the script:

```bash
cargo install --git ssh://git@git.opentalk.dev:222/opentalk/tools/check-changelog.git git-cliff-enhancer
```

[ConCom]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/
[Just]: https://just.systems/man/en/introduction.html
